DJ February 2021 (#156)
xaur/decred-news: journal/202102.md

{ introduction, major news of the month ordered by impact, don't put any links here }

- { 1.6.1 }
- { pos and pow upgraded, vote locked in }
- { props approved }
- { dcrdex 0.1.5 patch }
- { kohola maybe? }

## Release 1.6.1

{ remind to verify }

https://github.com/decred/decred-binaries/releases/tag/v1.6.1

## Upcoming Consensus Change

{ prepare to vote, set your prefs, dcrwallet }

https://voting.decred.org/

## Development

The work reported below has the "merged to master" status unless noted otherwise. It means that the work is completed, reviewed, and integrated into the source code that advanced users can build and run, but is not yet available in release binaries for regular users.

**[dcrd](https://github.com/decred/dcrd)**

The v1.6.1 patch release included the following changes:

- notification logic [modified](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2597) to force proof-of-work miners to upgrade so that voting on the new consensus changes can commence
- fixed a rare [issue](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2582) where connections might not be reestablished after a network outage

> In development towards the next release, month's highlight is the addition of [UTXO cache](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2591) that cuts initial blockchain download (IBD) time by ~33% at the cost of some extra memory. It is also a required step towards [multi-peer](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/issues/1145) parallel block downloading. { any other optimizations to mention that are unlocked by this? }

Author: Cool, added that too.

> Another highlight is the [introduction](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2579) of Age-Partioned Bloom Filters. APBF is a lookup device that can quickly tell if it contains an element. It can track _lot_ of data while using little memory, at the cost of a controlled rate of false positives. Unlike classic Bloom filters, it can handle unbounded amount of data by aging and discarding old items. The motivation for adding ABPFs to Decred is to replace the LRU (least recently used) cache used to continuously track what data other peers are known to have. For a concrete example, the memory to track addresses known by 125 peers is reduced from ~200 to ~5 MiB when using ABPFs. Also, the package will be [useful](https://matrix.to/#/!zefvTnlxYHPKvJMThI:decred.org/$ulmCeMPuDSSmt3KTB09fJpypa4fpooFILTXKtQNWUCg) for other projects like wallet, DEX, mobile wallets, etc. Read the details in full glory in the [PR](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2579) and the [README](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/tree/master/container/apbf). { is it too much of an intro? it's just too exciting to not hype it up a bit }

Reviewer: Age-Partioned -> Age-Partitioned

`_lot_` -> `_a lot_`

handle unbounded amount -> handle an unbounded amount

> { is it too much of an intro? it's just too exciting to not hype it up a bit }

Seems fine to me.  It's pretty exciting stuff.

Author: Good catch. I lost some bits when rehashing that para many times to simplify it.

{ introduction, major news of the month ordered by impact, don't put any links here }

- { 1.6.1 }
- { pos and pow upgraded, vote locked in }
- { props approved }
- { dcrdex 0.1.5 patch }
- { kohola maybe? }

## Release 1.6.1

{ remind to verify }

https://github.com/decred/decred-binaries/releases/tag/v1.6.1

## Upcoming Consensus Change

{ prepare to vote, set your prefs, dcrwallet }

https://voting.decred.org/

## Development

The work reported below has the "merged to master" status unless noted otherwise. It means that the work is completed, reviewed, and integrated into the source code that advanced users can build and run, but is not yet available in release binaries for regular users.

**[dcrd](https://github.com/decred/dcrd)**

The v1.6.1 patch release included the following changes:

- notification logic [modified](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2597) to force proof-of-work miners to upgrade so that voting on the new consensus changes can commence
- fixed a rare [issue](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2582) where connections might not be reestablished after a network outage

> In development towards the next release, this month's highlight is the addition of a [UTXO cache](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2591) that cuts initial blockchain download (IBD) time by ~33% at the cost of some extra memory. It also significantly speeds up block processing during normal operation and reduces the wear and tear on the storage medium by allowing entries that are created and spent between flushing intervals to avoid be written at all. UTXO cache is a required step towards [multi-peer](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/issues/1145) parallel block downloading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In development towards the next release, this month's highlight is the addition of a [UTXO cache](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2591) that cuts initial blockchain download (IBD) time by ~33% at the cost of some extra memory. It also significantly speeds up block processing during normal operation and reduces the wear and tear on the storage medium by allowing entries that are created and spent between flushing intervals to avoid being written at all. UTXO cache is a required step towards [multi-peer](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/issues/1145) parallel block downloading.
```

I realized I had a typo.

> Another highlight is the [introduction](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2579) of Age-Partitioned Bloom Filters. APBF is a lookup device that can quickly tell if it contains an element. It can track _a lot_ of data while using little memory, at the cost of a controlled rate of false positives. Unlike classic Bloom filters, it can handle an unbounded amount of data by aging and discarding old items. The motivation for adding ABPFs to Decred is to replace the LRU (least recently used) cache used to continuously track what data other peers are known to have. For a concrete example, the memory to track addresses known by 125 peers is reduced from ~200 to ~5 MiB when using ABPFs. Also, the package will be [useful](https://matrix.to/#/!zefvTnlxYHPKvJMThI:decred.org/$ulmCeMPuDSSmt3KTB09fJpypa4fpooFILTXKtQNWUCg) for other projects like wallet, DEX, mobile wallets, etc. Read the details in full glory in the [PR](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2579) and the [README](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/tree/master/container/apbf).

Reviewer 2: There is a mix of ABPF and APBF used in this journal. I think they should all be APBF, and ABPF is erroneous

Author: Oops no idea how did I type ABPF so many times. Dem cosmic rays...

Other merged work:

- primary operations in `apbf` package made more than two times [faster](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2584) with smart bit-level math
- tracking of recently [confirmed](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2580) transactions and [addresses](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2583) known by peers switched to use APBFs

> - tracking or recently [rejected](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2590) tx also switched to APBFs, with extra benefits of lowering bandwidth usage in high rejection scenarios while simultaneously increasing robustness against malicious peers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- tracking of recently [rejected](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2590) transactions also switched to APBFs, with extra benefits of lowering bandwidth usage in high rejection scenarios while simultaneously increasing robustness against malicious peers
```
